netstat: lists a handful of Active Internet connections with tcp connections between the local address and a foreign address and their status. It also displays a ton of Active UNIX domain sockets with information such as their types (DGRAM or STREAM), their state, and their path. Adding -a also includes local addresses that are currently listening. netstat is used to display conents of network interfaces. using -a displays the state of all active sockets, and -r displays the routing table.
ifconfig: this showed me a bunch of different network interface parameters such as eth0 or vlan6. using the -a option shows the state of all interfaces being displayed. ifconfig is used to display network interface parameters and to assigne a new IP address to an interface. 
hostname: this simply displayed the hostname "linux10621" which is likely the name of the host. hostname is used to display and set hostname of the system.
ping: ping displayed some different options to use such as -c for count or -i for interval. ping sends an ECHO_REQUEST datagram to a network host using ICMP protocol to elicit an ECHO_RESPONSE from the host or gateway. 
traceroute: traceroute also gave me a handful of different options to choose from. I went forward with "traceroute -4 linux10621" which displayed information about the host and some times listed in ms. traceroute is used to display the route packets trace to a network host using IP protocol. 
telnet: telnet brought me into a remote connection. telnet is used as a remote connection to server at a specific port (mainly 80).
host/dig: host also provided me with different options so I chose -V which showed me some information about the host version number. dig listed a handful of information about some servers. host and dig are used to perform DNS lookups.
route: route displayed the Kernel IP Routing table which included destinations, gateways, genmasks, flags, etc. route is used to manipulate network routing tables.
arp: this displayed the address, HWtype, HWaddress, flags, mask, and Iface. this is the address resolution protocol. arp is responsible for displaying and modifying the internet-to-ethernet address transation tables.